openmp/docs/04-openmp-reduction.md, before:

---
title:  OpenMP reductions and execution control
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2025
lang:   en
---


# OpenMP reductions {.section}

# Race condition in reduction

- Race conditions take place when multiple threads read and write a variable
  simultaneously, for example:

```fortranfree
asum = 0.0d0
!$omp parallel do shared(x,y,n,asum) private(i)
  do i = 1, n
     asum = asum + x(i)*y(i)
  end do
!$omp end parallel do
```

- Random results depending on the order the threads access **asum**
- We need some mechanism to control the access


# Reductions

- Summing the elements of an array is an example of a reduction operation
  $$
  S = \sum_{j=1}^{N} A_j = \sum_{j=1}^{\frac{N}{2}} A_j +
  \sum_{j=\frac{N}{2} + 1}^{N} A_j = B_1 + B_2 = \sum_{j=1}^{2} B_j
  $$

- OpenMP provides support for common reductions within parallel regions and
  loops


# Reduction clause

`reduction(operator:list)`
  : Performs reduction on the (scalar) variables in list

<br>

- Private reduction variable is created for each thread's partial result
- Private reduction variable is initialized to operator's initial value
- After parallel region the reduction operation is applied to private
  variables and result is aggregated to the shared variable


# Reduction operators in C/C++

<div class="column">

| Operator | Initial value |
|----------|---------------|
| `+`      | `0`           |
| `-`      | `0`           |
| `*`      | `1`           |
| `&&`     | `1`           |
| `||`     | `0`           |

</div>

<div class="column">

| Bitwise Operator | Initial value |
|----------|---------------|
| `&`      | `~0`          |
| `|`      | `0`           |
| `^`      | `0`           |

</div>


# Reduction operators in Fortran

<div class="column" style="font-size:0.8em">

| Operator         | Initial value |
|------------------|---------------|
| `+`              | `0`           |
| `-`              | `0`           |
| `*`              | `1`           |
| `max`            | least         |
| `min`            | largest       |
| `.and.`          | `.true.`      |
| `.or.`           | `.false.`     |
| `.eqv.`          | `.true.`      |
| `.neqv.`         | `.false.`     |

</div>

<div class="column" style="font-size:0.8em">

| Bitwise Operator | Initial value |
|------------------|---------------|
| `.iand.`           | all bits on   |
| `.ior.`            | `0`           |
| `.ieor.`           | `0`           |

</div>


# Race condition avoided with reduction clause

```fortranfree
!$omp parallel do shared(x,y,n) private(i) reduction(+:asum)
  do i = 1, n
     asum = asum + x(i)*y(i)
  end do
!$omp end parallel do
```

```c
#pragma omp parallel for shared(x,y,n) private(i) reduction(+:asum)
for(i=0; i < n; i++) {
  asum = asum + x[i] * y[i];
}
```


# OpenMP execution controls {.section}

# Execution controls

- Sometimes a part of a parallel region should be executed only by the
  master thread or by a single thread at a time
    - IO, initializations, updating global values, etc.
    - remember to synchronize!
- OpenMP provides clauses for controlling the execution of code blocks


# Execution control constructs

`barrier`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- When a thread reaches a barrier it only continues after all the threads in
  the same thread team have reached it
    - each barrier must be encountered by all threads in a team, or none at
      all
    - the sequence of work-sharing regions and barrier regions encountered
      must be same for all threads in a team
- Implicit barrier at the end of: `for`/`do`, `parallel`, `single`, `workshare`
  unless a `nowait` clause is specified


# Execution control constructs

<div class=column>
`master`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- Specifies a region that should be executed only by the master thread

- Other threads do not wait, *i.e.* no implicit barrier at the end

- Deprecated in OpenMP 5.1 and replaced with `masked`
</div>

<div class=column>
`single`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- Specifies that a region should be executed only by a single (arbitrary)
  thread

- Other threads wait (implicit barrier) unless a `nowait` clause is specified
</div>


# Execution control constructs

<div class=column>
`critical`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- A section that is executed by only one thread at a time
- No implicit barrier at the end
</div>

<div class=column>
`atomic`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- Strictly limited construct to update a single value, can not be applied to
  code blocks
- Only guarantees atomic update, does not protect function calls
- Can be faster on hardware platforms that support atomic updates
</div>

# Summary

- Several parallel reduction operators available via `reduction` clause
- OpenMP has many synchronization constructs
    - `barrier`
    - `single` and `master/masked`
    - `critical` and `atomic`

# Web resources

- OpenMP specification: <https://www.openmp.org/specifications/>
    - includes code examples, reference guide etc.
- OpenMP tutorials: <https://www.openmp.org/resources/tutorials-articles/>

Commit message:

openmp: add fine-coarse grained slide to 04-openmp-reduction

openmp/docs/04-openmp-reduction.md, after:

---
title:  OpenMP reductions and execution control
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2025
lang:   en
---


# OpenMP reductions {.section}

# Race condition in reduction

- Race conditions take place when multiple threads read and write a variable
  simultaneously, for example:

```fortranfree
asum = 0.0d0
!$omp parallel do shared(x,y,n,asum) private(i)
  do i = 1, n
     asum = asum + x(i)*y(i)
  end do
!$omp end parallel do
```

- Random results depending on the order the threads access **asum**
- We need some mechanism to control the access


# Reductions

- Summing the elements of an array is an example of a reduction operation
  $$
  S = \sum_{j=1}^{N} A_j = \sum_{j=1}^{\frac{N}{2}} A_j +
  \sum_{j=\frac{N}{2} + 1}^{N} A_j = B_1 + B_2 = \sum_{j=1}^{2} B_j
  $$

- OpenMP provides support for common reductions within parallel regions and
  loops


# Reduction clause

`reduction(operator:list)`
  : Performs reduction on the (scalar) variables in list

<br>

- Private reduction variable is created for each thread's partial result
- Private reduction variable is initialized to operator's initial value
- After parallel region the reduction operation is applied to private
  variables and result is aggregated to the shared variable


# Reduction operators in C/C++

<div class="column">

| Operator | Initial value |
|----------|---------------|
| `+`      | `0`           |
| `-`      | `0`           |
| `*`      | `1`           |
| `&&`     | `1`           |
| `||`     | `0`           |

</div>

<div class="column">

| Bitwise Operator | Initial value |
|----------|---------------|
| `&`      | `~0`          |
| `|`      | `0`           |
| `^`      | `0`           |

</div>


# Reduction operators in Fortran

<div class="column" style="font-size:0.8em">

| Operator         | Initial value |
|------------------|---------------|
| `+`              | `0`           |
| `-`              | `0`           |
| `*`              | `1`           |
| `max`            | least         |
| `min`            | largest       |
| `.and.`          | `.true.`      |
| `.or.`           | `.false.`     |
| `.eqv.`          | `.true.`      |
| `.neqv.`         | `.false.`     |

</div>

<div class="column" style="font-size:0.8em">

| Bitwise Operator | Initial value |
|------------------|---------------|
| `.iand.`           | all bits on   |
| `.ior.`            | `0`           |
| `.ieor.`           | `0`           |

</div>


# Race condition avoided with reduction clause

```fortranfree
!$omp parallel do shared(x,y,n) private(i) reduction(+:asum)
  do i = 1, n
     asum = asum + x(i)*y(i)
  end do
!$omp end parallel do
```

```c
#pragma omp parallel for shared(x,y,n) private(i) reduction(+:asum)
for(i=0; i < n; i++) {
  asum = asum + x[i] * y[i];
}
```


# OpenMP execution controls {.section}

# Execution controls

- Sometimes a part of a parallel region should be executed only by the
  master thread or by a single thread at a time
    - IO, initializations, updating global values, etc.
    - remember to synchronize!
- OpenMP provides clauses for controlling the execution of code blocks


# Execution control constructs

`barrier`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- When a thread reaches a barrier it only continues after all the threads in
  the same thread team have reached it
    - each barrier must be encountered by all threads in a team, or none at
      all
    - the sequence of work-sharing regions and barrier regions encountered
      must be same for all threads in a team
- Implicit barrier at the end of: `for`/`do`, `parallel`, `single`, `workshare`
  unless a `nowait` clause is specified


# Execution control constructs

<div class=column>
`master`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- Specifies a region that should be executed only by the master thread

- Other threads do not wait, *i.e.* no implicit barrier at the end

- Deprecated in OpenMP 5.1 and replaced with `masked`
</div>

<div class=column>
`single`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- Specifies that a region should be executed only by a single (arbitrary)
  thread

- Other threads wait (implicit barrier) unless a `nowait` clause is specified
</div>


# Execution control constructs

<div class=column>
`critical`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- A section that is executed by only one thread at a time
- No implicit barrier at the end
</div>

<div class=column>
`atomic`
  : `-`{.ghost}

- Strictly limited construct to update a single value, can not be applied to
  code blocks
- Only guarantees atomic update, does not protect function calls
- Can be faster on hardware platforms that support atomic updates
</div>

# OpenMP threading styles: fine/coarse grained

- Fine-grained
    - use **omp parallel do/for** on the most intensive loops
    - possible to threaqd an existing serial code with little effort and in
      parts

- Coarse-grained
    - whole (or most of) program within the same parallel region: OpenMP thread $\leftrightarrow$ MPI task
    - leverage execution control constructs

# Summary

- Several parallel reduction operators available via `reduction` clause
- OpenMP has many synchronization constructs
    - `barrier`
    - `single` and `master/masked`
    - `critical` and `atomic`

# Web resources

- OpenMP specification: <https://www.openmp.org/specifications/>
    - includes code examples, reference guide etc.
- OpenMP tutorials: <https://www.openmp.org/resources/tutorials-articles/>
