programming/fortran/docs/01_Fortran.md, before:

# Introduction to Fortran 95/2003 {.section}

# Getting started with Fortran {.section}

# Outline

- Fortran as a language
    - look and feel
    - from code to program
- Variables and operators
    - declare, assign
    - arrays
- Control structures
    - branches
    - loops

# Fortran as a language {.section}

# Why learn Fortran?

- Well suited for **numerical computations**
    - Likely over 50% of scientific applications are written in Fortran
- **Fast** code (compilers can optimize well)
- Handy **array data types**
- **Clarity** of code
- **Portability** of code
- Optimized **numerical libraries** available

# Short history of Fortran

- John W. Backus et al (1954): The IBM Mathematical **For**mula
  **Tran**slating System
- Early years development: Fortran II (1958), Fortran IV (1961),
  Fortran 66 & Basic Fortran (1966)
- Fortran 77 (1978)
- Fortran 90 (1991) a major revision and Fortran 95 (1997) a minor
  revision to it

# Short history of Fortran

- Fortran 2003 (2004): a major revision, adding e.g. object-oriented
  features, C-bindings
    - ”Fortran 95/2003” is the current *de facto* standard

- The latest standard is Fortran 2018: a minor revision
    - Fortran coarray improvements
    - C interoperability improvements

# Compiling and linking

<center>
![](img/fortran_compile.png)
</center>

# Transition from code to a program

- Compile and link in one go, execute the binary
- In more complex cases (multiple sources)
    - Compile each source code file (.f90) into an object file (.o)
    - Link object files into a binary and execute the binary

```console
$ gfortran -c main.f90
$ gfortran -c sub.f90
$ gfortran -o foo main.o sub.o
$ ./foo
```
After some modifications in `sub.f90`
```console
$ gfortran –c sub.f90
$ gfortran -o foo main.o sub.o
$ ./foo
$ gfortran main.f90 -o foo
$ ./foo
```

# Look and feel

```fortran
program square_root_example
  ! comments start with an exclamation point.
  ! you will find data type declarations, couple arithmetic operations
  ! and an interface that will ask a value for these computations. 
  implicit none
  real :: x, y 
  intrinsic sqrt ! fortran standard provides many commonly used functions 
 
  ! command line interface. ask a number and read it in 
  write (*,*) 'give a value (number) for x:'
  read (*,*) x

  y = x**2+1 ! power function and addition arithmetic 

  write (*,*) 'given value for x:', x 
  write (*,*) 'computed value of x**2 + 1:', y 
  ! print the square root of the argument y to screen 
  write (*,*) 'computed value of sqrt(x**2 + 1):', sqrt(y)
end program square_root_example
```

# Source code remarks

- Free format source code, but
    - A variable name can be no longer than 31 characters containing only
      letters, digits or underscore, and must start with a letter
    - Maximum row length is 132 characters
- No distinction between lower and uppercase characters
    - Character strings are case sensitive
- Line break is the statement separator
    - If a line is ended with an ampersand (&), the line continues onto
      the next line (max. 39 continuation lines allowed)
    - Semicolon (;) is the separator between statements on a single line

# Variables

```fortran
integer :: n0
real :: a, b
real :: r1=0.0
complex :: c
complex :: imag_number=(0.1, 1.0)

character(len=80) :: place
character(len=80) :: name='james bond'

logical :: test0 = .true.
logical :: test1 = .false.
real, parameter :: pi=3.14159
```

# Variables

- *Constants* are defined with the PARAMETER attribute – they cannot be 
  altered after their declaration
- *Variables* must be *declared* at the beginning of the program or
  procedure where they are used
- They can also be given a value at declaration (not recommended)
- The *intrinsic* data types in Fortran are `integer`, `real`,
`complex`, `character` and `logical`

# Operators

```fortran
real :: x, y; integer :: i = 10; logical :: a, b
! Arithmetic operators
x = 2.0**(-i)  ! power function and negation precedence: first
x = x*real(i)  ! multiplication and type change precedence: second
x = x / 2.0    ! division precedence: second
i = i + 1      ! addition precedence: third
i = i - 1      ! subtraction precedence: third
! Relational operators
a < b   ! or (f77) a.lt.b -- less than
a <= b  ! or (f77) a.le.b -- less than or equal to
a == b  ! or (f77) a.eq.b -- equal to
a /= b  ! or (f77) a.ne.b -- not equal to
a > b   ! or (f77) a.gt.b -- greater than
a >= b  ! or (f77) a.ge.b -- greater than or equal to
! Logical operators
a.not.b ! logical negation precedence: first
a.and.b ! logical conjunction precedence: second
a.or.b  ! logical inclusive disjunction precedence: third
```

# Arrays and strings

```fortran
! Arrays
integer, parameter :: m = 100, n = 500
integer :: idx(m)
real :: vector(0:n-1)
real :: matrix(m, n)
character (len=80) :: screen (24)
! or
integer, dimension(m) :: idx
real, dimension(0:n-1) :: vector
real, dimension(m, n) :: matrix
character(len=80), dimension(24) :: screen
```
By default, Fortran indexing starts from 1

# Control structures {.section}

# Conditionals (if-else)

- Conditionals allow the program to execute different code based on
  some condition(s)
- Condition can be anything from a simple comparison to a complex
  combination using logical operators

```fortran
if (condition) then
! do something
else if (condition2) then
! .. or maybe alternative something else
else
! .. or at least this
end if
```

# Conditionals example

```fortran
program placetest
  implicit none
  logical :: in_square1, in_square2
  real :: x, y
  write(*,*) ’give point coordinates x and y’
  read (*,*) x, y
  in_square1 = (x >= 0. .and. x <= 2. .and. y >= 0. .and. y <= 2.)
  in_square2 = (x >= 1. .and. x <= 3. .and. y >= 1. .and. y <= 3.)
  if (in_square1 .and. in_square2) then ! inside both
    write(*,*) ’point within both squares’
  else if (in_square1) then ! inside square 1 only
    write(*,*) ’point inside square 1’
  else if (in_square2) then ! inside square 2 only
    write(*,*) ’point inside square 2’
  else ! both are .false.
    write(*,*) ’point outside both squares’
  end if
end program placetest
```

# Loops

- Three loop formats available in Fortran
    - integer counter (fixed number of iterations)
    - condition controlled (do until condition is false)
    - explicit exit statement

```fortran
do {control clause}
  ! execute something again and again until stopped
end do

! where the control clause (optional) is either of the form
! i=init_value, max_value, increment
! or a condition to execute while true
! while (condition)
```

# Loops example

```fortran
 integer :: i, stepsize, numberofpoints 
 integer, parameter :: max_points=100000 
 real :: x_coodinate(max_points), x, totalsum
 
 ! a do-loop with an integer counter (count controlled)
 stepsize = 2
 do i = 1, max_points, stepsize 
   x_coordinate(i) = i*stepsize*0.05 
 end do
 ! condition controlled loop (do while) totalsum = 0.0
 read(*,*) x
 do while (x > 0) 
   totalsum = totalsum + x read(*,*) x 
 end do
```

# Loops example 2

```fortran
 real :: x, totalsum, eps
 totalsum = 0.0
 
 ! do loop without loop control
 do
   read(*,*) x
   if (x < 0) then
     exit ! = exit the loop
   else if (x > upperlimit) then
     cycle ! = do not execute any further statements, but
           ! instead cycle back to the beginning of the loop
   end if
   totalsum = totalsum + x
 end do
```

# Labels example

```fortran
program gcd
  ! computes the greatest common divisor, Euclidean algorithm
  implicit none
  integer :: m, n, t
  write(*,*)’ give positive integers m and n :’
  read(*,*) m, n
  write(*,*)’m:’, m,’ n:’, n
positive_check: if (m > 0 .and. n > 0) then
main_algorithm: do while (n /= 0)             ! positive check and main_algorithm
      t = mod(m,n)                            ! are LABELS, that can be given to
      m = n                                   ! control structures and used with
      n = t                                   ! e.g. cycle and loop 
    end do main_algorithm
    write(*,*) ’greatest common divisor: ’, m
  else
    write(*,*) ’negative value entered’
  end if positive_check
end program gcd
```

# Select case

- `select case` statements matches the entries of a list against the case
  index
    - Only one found match is allowed
    - Usually arguments are character strings or integers
    - `default` branch if no match found

```fortran
integer :: i; logical :: is_prime, test_prime_number
! ...
select case (i)
  case (2,3,5,7)
    is_prime = .true.
  case (1,4,6,8:10)
    is_prime = .false.
  case default
    is_prime=test_prime_number(i)
end select
```

# Summary

- Fortran is – despite its long history – a modern programming
  language designed especially for scientific computing
    - Versatile, quite easy to learn, powerful
- In our first encounter, we discussed
    - Variables, data types, operators
    - Control structures: loops and conditionals

Commit message:

Simplify build example and add a slide about procedures

programming/fortran/docs/01_Fortran.md, after:

# Introduction to Fortran 95/2003 {.section}

# Getting started with Fortran {.section}

# Outline

- Fortran as a language
    - look and feel
    - from code to program
- Variables and operators
    - declare, assign
    - arrays
- Control structures
    - branches
    - loops

# Fortran as a language {.section}

# Why learn Fortran?

- Well suited for **numerical computations**
    - Likely over 50% of scientific applications are written in Fortran
- **Fast** code (compilers can optimize well)
- Handy **array data types**
- **Clarity** of code
- **Portability** of code
- Optimized **numerical libraries** available

# Short history of Fortran

- John W. Backus et al (1954): The IBM Mathematical **For**mula
  **Tran**slating System
- Early years development: Fortran II (1958), Fortran IV (1961),
  Fortran 66 & Basic Fortran (1966)
- Fortran 77 (1978)
- Fortran 90 (1991) a major revision and Fortran 95 (1997) a minor
  revision to it

# Short history of Fortran

- Fortran 2003 (2004): a major revision, adding e.g. object-oriented
  features, C-bindings
    - ”Fortran 95/2003” is the current *de facto* standard

- The latest standard is Fortran 2018: a minor revision
    - Fortran coarray improvements
    - C interoperability improvements

# Transition from source code to executable program

<center>
![](img/fortran_compile.png)
</center>

# Transition from source code to executable program

- Simple programs can be compiled and linked in one go: 
```console
$ gfortran -o hello hello.f90
$ ./hello
Hello from Fortran
```

- More complex cases will be discussed later on
 
# Look and feel

```fortran
program square_root_example
  ! comments start with an exclamation point.
  ! you will find data type declarations, couple arithmetic operations
  ! and an interface that will ask a value for these computations. 
  implicit none
  real :: x, y 
  intrinsic sqrt ! fortran standard provides many commonly used functions 
 
  ! command line interface. ask a number and read it in 
  write (*,*) 'give a value (number) for x:'
  read (*,*) x

  y = x**2+1 ! power function and addition arithmetic 

  write (*,*) 'given value for x:', x 
  write (*,*) 'computed value of x**2 + 1:', y 
  ! print the square root of the argument y to screen 
  write (*,*) 'computed value of sqrt(x**2 + 1):', sqrt(y)
end program square_root_example
```

# Source code remarks

- Free format source code, but
    - A variable name can be no longer than 31 characters containing only
      letters, digits or underscore, and must start with a letter
    - Maximum row length is 132 characters
- No distinction between lower and uppercase characters
    - Character strings are case sensitive
- Line break is the statement separator
    - If a line is ended with an ampersand (&), the line continues onto
      the next line (max. 39 continuation lines allowed)
    - Semicolon (;) is the separator between statements on a single line

# Variables

```fortran
integer :: n0
real :: a, b
real :: r1=0.0
complex :: c
complex :: imag_number=(0.1, 1.0)

character(len=80) :: place
character(len=80) :: name='james bond'

logical :: test0 = .true.
logical :: test1 = .false.
real, parameter :: pi=3.14159
```

# Variables

- *Constants* are defined with the PARAMETER attribute – they cannot be 
  altered after their declaration
- *Variables* must be *declared* at the beginning of the program or
  procedure where they are used
- They can also be given a value at declaration (not recommended)
- The *intrinsic* data types in Fortran are `integer`, `real`,
`complex`, `character` and `logical`

# Operators

```fortran
real :: x, y; integer :: i = 10; logical :: a, b
! Arithmetic operators
x = 2.0**(-i)  ! power function and negation precedence: first
x = x*real(i)  ! multiplication and type change precedence: second
x = x / 2.0    ! division precedence: second
i = i + 1      ! addition precedence: third
i = i - 1      ! subtraction precedence: third
! Relational operators
a < b   ! or (f77) a.lt.b -- less than
a <= b  ! or (f77) a.le.b -- less than or equal to
a == b  ! or (f77) a.eq.b -- equal to
a /= b  ! or (f77) a.ne.b -- not equal to
a > b   ! or (f77) a.gt.b -- greater than
a >= b  ! or (f77) a.ge.b -- greater than or equal to
! Logical operators
a.not.b ! logical negation precedence: first
a.and.b ! logical conjunction precedence: second
a.or.b  ! logical inclusive disjunction precedence: third
```

# Arrays and strings

```fortran
! Arrays
integer, parameter :: m = 100, n = 500
integer :: idx(m)
real :: vector(0:n-1)
real :: matrix(m, n)
character (len=80) :: screen (24)
! or
integer, dimension(m) :: idx
real, dimension(0:n-1) :: vector
real, dimension(m, n) :: matrix
character(len=80), dimension(24) :: screen
```
By default, Fortran indexing starts from 1

# Control structures {.section}

# Conditionals (if-else)

- Conditionals allow the program to execute different code based on
  some condition(s)
- Condition can be anything from a simple comparison to a complex
  combination using logical operators

```fortran
if (condition) then
! do something
else if (condition2) then
! .. or maybe alternative something else
else
! .. or at least this
end if
```

# Conditionals example

```fortran
program placetest
  implicit none
  logical :: in_square1, in_square2
  real :: x, y
  write(*,*) ’give point coordinates x and y’
  read (*,*) x, y
  in_square1 = (x >= 0. .and. x <= 2. .and. y >= 0. .and. y <= 2.)
  in_square2 = (x >= 1. .and. x <= 3. .and. y >= 1. .and. y <= 3.)
  if (in_square1 .and. in_square2) then ! inside both
    write(*,*) ’point within both squares’
  else if (in_square1) then ! inside square 1 only
    write(*,*) ’point inside square 1’
  else if (in_square2) then ! inside square 2 only
    write(*,*) ’point inside square 2’
  else ! both are .false.
    write(*,*) ’point outside both squares’
  end if
end program placetest
```

# Loops

- Three loop formats available in Fortran
    - integer counter (fixed number of iterations)
    - condition controlled (do until condition is false)
    - explicit exit statement

```fortran
do {control clause}
  ! execute something again and again until stopped
end do

! where the control clause (optional) is either of the form
! i=init_value, max_value, increment
! or a condition to execute while true
! while (condition)
```

# Loops example

```fortran
 integer :: i, stepsize, numberofpoints 
 integer, parameter :: max_points=100000 
 real :: x_coodinate(max_points), x, totalsum
 
 ! a do-loop with an integer counter (count controlled)
 stepsize = 2
 do i = 1, max_points, stepsize 
   x_coordinate(i) = i*stepsize*0.05 
 end do
 ! condition controlled loop (do while) totalsum = 0.0
 read(*,*) x
 do while (x > 0) 
   totalsum = totalsum + x read(*,*) x 
 end do
```

# Loops example 2

```fortran
 real :: x, totalsum, eps
 totalsum = 0.0
 
 ! do loop without loop control
 do
   read(*,*) x
   if (x < 0) then
     exit ! = exit the loop
   else if (x > upperlimit) then
     cycle ! = do not execute any further statements, but
           ! instead cycle back to the beginning of the loop
   end if
   totalsum = totalsum + x
 end do
```

# Labels example

```fortran
program gcd
  ! computes the greatest common divisor, Euclidean algorithm
  implicit none
  integer :: m, n, t
  write(*,*)’ give positive integers m and n :’
  read(*,*) m, n
  write(*,*)’m:’, m,’ n:’, n
positive_check: if (m > 0 .and. n > 0) then
main_algorithm: do while (n /= 0)             ! positive check and main_algorithm
      t = mod(m,n)                            ! are LABELS, that can be given to
      m = n                                   ! control structures and used with
      n = t                                   ! e.g. cycle and loop 
    end do main_algorithm
    write(*,*) ’greatest common divisor: ’, m
  else
    write(*,*) ’negative value entered’
  end if positive_check
end program gcd
```

# Select case

- `select case` statements matches the entries of a list against the case
  index
    - Only one found match is allowed
    - Usually arguments are character strings or integers
    - `default` branch if no match found

```fortran
integer :: i; logical :: is_prime, test_prime_number
! ...
select case (i)
  case (2,3,5,7)
    is_prime = .true.
  case (1,4,6,8:10)
    is_prime = .false.
  case default
    is_prime=test_prime_number(i)
end select
```

# Procedures

- Procedure is block of code that can be called from other code.
- Calling code passes data to procedure via arguments
- Fortran has two types of procedures: *subroutines* and *functions*
    - Subroutines pass data back via arguments
    - Functions return a value
- Fortran has both user defined and intrinsic procedures

```fortran
call random_number(x)   ! Subroutine is preceded by "call" statement, 
                        ! input and output is provided via the arguments
z = sin(x)              ! Function returns value(s) based on the input arguments
```

# Summary

- Fortran is – despite its long history – a modern programming
  language designed especially for scientific computing
    - Versatile, quite easy to learn, powerful
- In our first encounter, we discussed
    - Variables, data types, operators
    - Control structures: loops and conditionals
    - Fortran has two types of procedures: subroutines and functions
