computer-platforms/docs/01_modules_make_batch_jobs.md, before:

---
title:  Working in supercomputers
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2023
lang:   en
---

# Outline

- Connecting to supercomputers
- Directory structure in CSC supercomputers
- Module system
- Building applications with `make`
- Running applications via batch job system

<br>
Some information provided here is specific to LUMI, Mahti, and Puhti, some more general

# Connecting to supercomputers

- `ssh` is used to connect to all CSC supercomputers
```
ssh <my_user_id>@lumi.csc.fi
```
- With **ssh keys** one can login without password
    - Automatically setup for LUMI
    - In Mahti and Puhti need to create and setup manually

```
ssh-keygen -o -a 100 -t ed25519 # Not needed if key exists
ssh-copy-id <my_user_id>@mahti.csc.fi
```


# Directory structure in CSC supercomputers

- All the CSC supercomputers have separate file systems
    - Files need to be explicitly copied between LUMI, Mahti and Puhti
- All the CSC supercomputers share a commong directory structure

|            |Owner   |Environment variable|Path                 |
|------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
|**home**    |Personal|`${HOME}`           |`/users/<user-name>` |
|**projappl**|Project |Not available       |`/projappl/<project>`|
|**scratch** |Project |Not available       |`/scratch/<project>` |

# Modules {.section}

# Module environment

- Supercomputers have a large number of users with different needs for
  development environments and applications
- _Environment modules_ provide a convenient way to dynamically change the
  user's environment
- In this way, different compiler suites and application versions can be used
  more easily
    * They basically just change where things are "pointing". So when you run
      `gcc` the loaded module decides whether you are using version 4.9 or 5.3
      or 6.0 and so on
    * Most programs require loading a module to be accessible


# Common module commands

<div class="column">
`module load mod`
  : Load module **mod** in shell environment

`module unload mod`
  : Remove module **mod** from environment

`module list`
  : List loaded modules

`module avail`
  : List all available modules
</div>

<div class="column">
`module spider mod`
  : Search for module **mod**

`module show mod`
  : Get information about module **mod**

`module switch mod1 mod2`
  : Switch loaded **mod1** to **mod2**
</div>


# Make {.section}

# Compiling and linking

<div class=column>
- A compiler turns a source code file into an object file that contains
  machine code that can be executed by the processor
- A linker combines several compiled object files into a single executable
  file
- Together, compiling and linking can be called building
</div>
<div class=column>
![](images/building.svg){.center}
</div>

# Compiling and linking: possible problems

- Programs should usually be separated into several files
  <br>$\Rightarrow$ complicated dependency structures
- Building large programs takes time
    - could we just rebuild the parts that changed?
- Having different options when building
    - debug versions, enabling/disabling features, etc.

# Make

- Make allows you to define how to build individual parts of a program
  and how they depend on each other. This enables:
    - Building parts of a program and only rebuilding necessary parts
    - Building different version and configurations of a program

![](images/depend.png){.center width=40%}

# Make rules

<div class=column>
- Make **rules** define how some part of your program is built
    - **Target**: the output file (or aim) of your rule
    - **Dependency**: which other targets your target depends on
    - **Recipe**: how you produce your target
- Rules are defined in a file which is by default called `Makefile`
</div>

<div class=column>
_A make rule_
![](images/rule.png){.center width=100%}
</div>


# Simple Makefile example

<div class=column>
- Dependencies can be files or other targets
- Recipes consist of one or more shell commands
    - Recipe lines start with a **tabulator**
- If the dependencies are newer than the target, make runs the recipe
- Run first rule: `make`
- Run specific rule: `make <target>`
</div>

<div class=column>
```makefile
main: main.c functions.o
    gcc -c main.c
    gcc -o main main.o functions.o

functions.o: functions.c
    gcc -c functions.c

.PHONY: clean
clean:
    rm -f main.o functions.o main
```
</div>


# Variables and patterns in rules

<div class=column>
- It is possible to define variables, for example compiler and link commands
  and flags
- Targets, dependencies and recipes can contain special wild cards
- Rerunning all the recipies can be forced with `make -B`
</div>

<div class=column>
```makefile
CC=cc
CCFLAGS=-O3

# Files of the form filename.o depend on
# filename.c
%.o: %.c
        $(CC) $(CCFLAGS) -c $< -o $@
```
</div>


# Batch queue system {.section}

# Batch queue system

- On a cluster, instead of running a program instantly, you submit your
  program/simulation (aka job) to a queue and the system will then execute it
  once the resources are available
    - The queue enables effective and fair resource usage
    - CSC uses SLURM as the queue system

- When running a job on a supercomputer you need to:
    - Describe how you want to run the job and what resources you need
    - Add a command that launches your program
    - Submit your job to a queue
- This is done with a batch job script


# Example SLURM batch job script

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name=example
#SBATCH --account=<project_id>
#SBATCH –-partition=debug
#SBATCH –-time=00:10:00
#SBATCH –-nodes=2
#SBATCH –-ntasks-per-nodes=128

# srun launches "nodes * ntasks-per-nodes" copies of myprog
srun myprog
```

- More examples:
    - <https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/runjobs/scheduled-jobs/batch-job/>
    - <https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-puhti/>
    - <https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-mahti/>


# Running batch jobs under SLURM

- Submit your batch job script to the queue using `sbatch`
  ```bash
  sbatch my_job.sh
  ```
- You can follow the status of your jobs with `squeue`:
  ```bash
  squeue -u my_username
  ```
- If something goes wrong, you can cancel your job with `scancel`:
  ```bash
  scancel jobid
  ```
  (here the jobid is the numeric ID of the job)
- Show job resource usage (for completed jobs) with `sacct`:
  ```bash
  sacct jobid
  ```

# Useful Slurm environment variables


Following variables are available inside Slurm scripts:

<small>

- `SLURM_JOB_NAME` : name given in `job_name`
- `SLURM_JOBID`
- `SLURM_JOB_NODELIST` : list of nodes the job will run

</small>

Following variables are available inside program launched by `srun`

<small>

- `SLURM_PROCID` : global id of process 
- `SLURM_LOCALID` : node local id of process 

</small>

Following variables override the corresponding variables in the batch script

<small>

- `SBATCH_ACCOUNT` : `--account`
- `SBATCH_PARTITION` : `--partition`

</small>

Commit message:

One slide about build generators

computer-platforms/docs/01_modules_make_batch_jobs.md, after:

---
title:  Working in supercomputers
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2023
lang:   en
---

# Outline

- Connecting to supercomputers
- Directory structure in CSC supercomputers
- Module system
- Building applications with `make`
- Running applications via batch job system

<br>
Some information provided here is specific to LUMI, Mahti, and Puhti, some more general

# Connecting to supercomputers

- `ssh` is used to connect to all CSC supercomputers
```
ssh <my_user_id>@lumi.csc.fi
```
- With **ssh keys** one can login without password
    - Automatically setup for LUMI
    - In Mahti and Puhti need to create and setup manually

```
ssh-keygen -o -a 100 -t ed25519 # Not needed if key exists
ssh-copy-id <my_user_id>@mahti.csc.fi
```


# Directory structure in CSC supercomputers

- All the CSC supercomputers have separate file systems
    - Files need to be explicitly copied between LUMI, Mahti and Puhti
- All the CSC supercomputers share a commong directory structure

|            |Owner   |Environment variable|Path                 |
|------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
|**home**    |Personal|`${HOME}`           |`/users/<user-name>` |
|**projappl**|Project |Not available       |`/projappl/<project>`|
|**scratch** |Project |Not available       |`/scratch/<project>` |

# Modules {.section}

# Module environment

- Supercomputers have a large number of users with different needs for
  development environments and applications
- _Environment modules_ provide a convenient way to dynamically change the
  user's environment
- In this way, different compiler suites and application versions can be used
  more easily
    * They basically just change where things are "pointing". So when you run
      `gcc` the loaded module decides whether you are using version 4.9 or 5.3
      or 6.0 and so on
    * Most programs require loading a module to be accessible


# Common module commands

<div class="column">
`module load mod`
  : Load module **mod** in shell environment

`module unload mod`
  : Remove module **mod** from environment

`module list`
  : List loaded modules

`module avail`
  : List all available modules
</div>

<div class="column">
`module spider mod`
  : Search for module **mod**

`module show mod`
  : Get information about module **mod**

`module switch mod1 mod2`
  : Switch loaded **mod1** to **mod2**
</div>


# Make {.section}

# Compiling and linking

<div class=column>
- A compiler turns a source code file into an object file that contains
  machine code that can be executed by the processor
- A linker combines several compiled object files into a single executable
  file
- Together, compiling and linking can be called building
</div>
<div class=column>
![](images/building.svg){.center}
</div>

# Compiling and linking: possible problems

- Programs should usually be separated into several files
  <br>$\Rightarrow$ complicated dependency structures
- Building large programs takes time
    - could we just rebuild the parts that changed?
- Having different options when building
    - debug versions, enabling/disabling features, etc.

# Make

- Make allows you to define how to build individual parts of a program
  and how they depend on each other. This enables:
    - Building parts of a program and only rebuilding necessary parts
    - Building different version and configurations of a program

![](images/depend.png){.center width=40%}

# Make rules

<div class=column>
- Make **rules** define how some part of your program is built
    - **Target**: the output file (or aim) of your rule
    - **Dependency**: which other targets your target depends on
    - **Recipe**: how you produce your target
- Rules are defined in a file which is by default called `Makefile`
</div>

<div class=column>
_A make rule_
![](images/rule.png){.center width=100%}
</div>


# Simple Makefile example

<div class=column>
- Dependencies can be files or other targets
- Recipes consist of one or more shell commands
    - Recipe lines start with a **tabulator**
- If the dependencies are newer than the target, make runs the recipe
- Run first rule: `make`
- Run specific rule: `make <target>`
</div>

<div class=column>
```makefile
main: main.c functions.o
    gcc -c main.c
    gcc -o main main.o functions.o

functions.o: functions.c
    gcc -c functions.c

.PHONY: clean
clean:
    rm -f main.o functions.o main
```
</div>


# Variables and patterns in rules

<div class=column>
- It is possible to define variables, for example compiler and link commands
  and flags
- Targets, dependencies and recipes can contain special wild cards
- Rerunning all the recipies can be forced with `make -B`
</div>

<div class=column>
```makefile
CC=cc
CCFLAGS=-O3

# Files of the form filename.o depend on
# filename.c
%.o: %.c
        $(CC) $(CCFLAGS) -c $< -o $@
```
</div>

# Build generators

- In a large software projects, figuring out all the dependencies between 
  software modules can be difficult
- `Makefile` is not necessarily portable
- In order to improve portability and make dependency handling easier, build generators
  are often used
    - Select automatically correct compilers and compiler options
    - Create `Makefile` from simpler template
- **GNU Autotools** and **cmake** are the most common build generators in HPC


# Batch queue system {.section}

# Batch queue system

- On a cluster, instead of running a program instantly, you submit your
  program/simulation (aka job) to a queue and the system will then execute it
  once the resources are available
    - The queue enables effective and fair resource usage
    - CSC uses SLURM as the queue system

- When running a job on a supercomputer you need to:
    - Describe how you want to run the job and what resources you need
    - Add a command that launches your program
    - Submit your job to a queue
- This is done with a batch job script


# Example SLURM batch job script

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --job-name=example
#SBATCH --account=<project_id>
#SBATCH –-partition=debug
#SBATCH –-time=00:10:00
#SBATCH –-nodes=2
#SBATCH –-ntasks-per-nodes=128

# srun launches "nodes * ntasks-per-nodes" copies of myprog
srun myprog
```

- More examples:
    - <https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/runjobs/scheduled-jobs/batch-job/>
    - <https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-puhti/>
    - <https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-mahti/>


# Running batch jobs under SLURM

- Submit your batch job script to the queue using `sbatch`
  ```bash
  sbatch my_job.sh
  ```
- You can follow the status of your jobs with `squeue`:
  ```bash
  squeue -u my_username
  ```
- If something goes wrong, you can cancel your job with `scancel`:
  ```bash
  scancel jobid
  ```
  (here the jobid is the numeric ID of the job)
- Show job resource usage (for completed jobs) with `sacct`:
  ```bash
  sacct jobid
  ```

# Useful Slurm environment variables


Following variables are available inside Slurm scripts:

<small>

- `SLURM_JOB_NAME` : name given in `job_name`
- `SLURM_JOBID`
- `SLURM_JOB_NODELIST` : list of nodes the job will run

</small>

Following variables are available inside program launched by `srun`

<small>

- `SLURM_PROCID` : global id of process 
- `SLURM_LOCALID` : node local id of process 

</small>

Following variables override the corresponding variables in the batch script

<small>

- `SBATCH_ACCOUNT` : `--account`
- `SBATCH_PARTITION` : `--partition`

</small>
