closing/docs/01-closing.md, before:

---
title:  Closing
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2025
lang:   en
---

# Learning objectives

- The goal is to build HPC expertise up to an intermediate/semi-advanced level during the school.
- After the summer school, the participants will be able to:
  - Identify main parallel programming concepts
  - Create parallel MPI programs with C, C++, or Fortran programming languages
  - Create GPU-accelerated programs using HIP/CUDA
  - Recognize advanced parallel programming constructs
  - Understand and modify HPC applications utilizing MPI, OpenMP, and/or HIP/CUDA


# LUMI project used during the school

- Summer School LUMI project will end next week Thursday 10.7.2025
  - Please transfer out the data you wish to keep


# Using LUMI beyond the school

<div style="position: absolute; left:10.0em; top:0.8em">
![](img/lumi_consortium.png){.center width=80%}
</div>

:::::: {.columns}
::: {.column width="55%"}
- LUMI is a EuroHPC supercomputer
  - Co-funded by EuroHPC JU and the LUMI Consortium
  - Available for all users in Europe via EuroHPC

- Users in LUMI consortium countries can access the national LUMI resources in addition to the EuroHPC resources
  - To get started, apply a project <https://lumi-supercomputer.eu/get-started/>
:::
::: {.column width="45%"}
:::
::::::


# Using LUMI

- LUMI documentation
  - <https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/>
- LUMI training materials
  - <https://lumi-supercomputer.github.io/LUMI-training-materials/>
- LUMI AI Guide
  - <https://github.com/Lumi-supercomputer/LUMI-AI-Guide/>
- LUMI User Support Team
  - <https://lumi-supercomputer.eu/user-support/need-help/>


# Keeping contact

- The chat channel remains open while active, but note that the message retention period is 6 months
  - <https://chat.csc.fi/group/CSC_Summer_School_in_HPC_2025>
- A LinkedIn group for present participants and alumni
  - <https://www.linkedin.com/groups/12051233>
- Email works too


# Materials

- All material remains in the Summer School GitHub repository<br><https://github.com/csc-training/summerschool/>
  - See a zip file containing all the slides too
- A static copy of 2025 content will be published as a release under GitHub


# Upcoming CSC trainings

- Training portfolio: Overview of trainings<br>
  <https://research.csc.fi/training-portfolio/>
  - Portable GPU Programming
  - Practical Deep Learning
  - ...
- Training calendar: Schedule of trainings<br>
  <https://csc.fi/en/trainings/training-calendar/>


# Certificate

- You should have received a training certificate by email already
  - If not, please contact organizers


# Feedback

- You should have received a link to the feedback form by email
  - Anonymous
  - Your feedback is highly valued!

- <u>Now</u> it's a good time fill the feedback form


# Acknowledgements

<div style="position: absolute; left:0.0em; top:3.0em">
![](img/acknowledgements.svg){.center width=80%}
</div>

# Thank you!

<br>
<br>
<br>
<center>
Big thank you to all of you!
</center>

Commit message:

Add Mahti project end date

closing/docs/01-closing.md, after:

---
title:  Closing
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2025
lang:   en
---

# Learning objectives

- The goal is to build HPC expertise up to an intermediate/semi-advanced level during the school.
- After the summer school, the participants will be able to:
  - Identify main parallel programming concepts
  - Create parallel MPI programs with C, C++, or Fortran programming languages
  - Create GPU-accelerated programs using HIP/CUDA
  - Recognize advanced parallel programming constructs
  - Understand and modify HPC applications utilizing MPI, OpenMP, and/or HIP/CUDA


# LUMI project used during the school

- Summer School LUMI project will end next week Thursday 10.7.2025
- Summer School Mahti project will end next week Friday 11.7.2025
- Remember to transfer out all the data you wish to keep before the project ends


# Using LUMI beyond the school

<div style="position: absolute; left:10.0em; top:0.8em">
![](img/lumi_consortium.png){.center width=80%}
</div>

:::::: {.columns}
::: {.column width="55%"}
- LUMI is a EuroHPC supercomputer
  - Co-funded by EuroHPC JU and the LUMI Consortium
  - Available for all users in Europe via EuroHPC

- Users in LUMI consortium countries can access the national LUMI resources in addition to the EuroHPC resources
  - To get started, apply a project <https://lumi-supercomputer.eu/get-started/>
:::
::: {.column width="45%"}
:::
::::::


# Using LUMI

- LUMI documentation
  - <https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/>
- LUMI training materials
  - <https://lumi-supercomputer.github.io/LUMI-training-materials/>
- LUMI AI Guide
  - <https://github.com/Lumi-supercomputer/LUMI-AI-Guide/>
- LUMI User Support Team
  - <https://lumi-supercomputer.eu/user-support/need-help/>


# Keeping contact

- The chat channel remains open while active, but note that the message retention period is 6 months
  - <https://chat.csc.fi/group/CSC_Summer_School_in_HPC_2025>
- A LinkedIn group for present participants and alumni
  - <https://www.linkedin.com/groups/12051233>
- Email works too


# Materials

- All material remains in the Summer School GitHub repository<br><https://github.com/csc-training/summerschool/>
  - See a zip file containing all the slides too
- A static copy of 2025 content will be published as a release under GitHub


# Upcoming CSC trainings

- Training portfolio: Overview of trainings<br>
  <https://research.csc.fi/training-portfolio/>
  - Portable GPU Programming
  - Practical Deep Learning
  - ...
- Training calendar: Schedule of trainings<br>
  <https://csc.fi/en/trainings/training-calendar/>


# Certificate

- You should have received a training certificate by email already
  - If not, please contact organizers


# Feedback

- You should have received a link to the feedback form by email
  - Anonymous
  - Your feedback is highly valued!

- <u>Now</u> it's a good time fill the feedback form


# Acknowledgements

<div style="position: absolute; left:0.0em; top:3.0em">
![](img/acknowledgements.svg){.center width=80%}
</div>

# Thank you!

<br>
<br>
<br>
<center>
Big thank you to all of you!
</center>
