gpu-hip/streams/README.md, before:

# Investigating streams and events

This exercise demonstrates an asynchronous data transfer and computation. Three different asynchronous cases are created, and their timings are printed out. The timings are recorded with hipEvent calls on the stream 0.

## Instructions

In the exercise, the following HIP functions are needed:

* hipStreamCreate()
* hipMemcpyAsync()
* hipLaunchKernelGGL()
* hipEventRecord()
* hipEventSynchronize()
* hipEventElapsedTime()
* hipStreamDestroy()

### Case 1

1) Create `nStream` (nStream = 4) streams and split the total problem size `n` evenly between these streams
2) Create a loop and execute the kernels in different streams with the appropriate workload per stream

### Case 2

1) Record a new event (use the existing variables where possible)
2) Use the existing streams, and split the problem size `n` evenly between these streams (same as case 1)
3) Create one loop 
	1) In the loop: Copy the data from host to device through the streams asynchronously (make sure the memcopies are split evenly for each stream)
	2) In the loop: Launch the kernel for each stream
	3) In the loop: Copy the data from device to host through the streams asynchronously 
4) Synchronize with hipEventSynchronize()
5) Record a stop event and calculate the new Elapsed time

### Case 3

1) Copy the case 2 here
2) Instead of doing the asynchronous memcopies and the kernel in the same loop, create a separate loop for each (3 in total)

## Additional considerations

* You can try setting `USE_PINNED_HOST_MEM` to `0` at line `#4`, to see how the timings change if we do not use pinned host memory.

Commit message:

Update stream exercise problem size, did not run on LUMI

gpu-hip/streams/README.md, after:

# Investigating streams and events

This exercise demonstrates an asynchronous data transfer and computation. Three different asynchronous cases are created, and their timings are printed out. The timings are recorded with hipEvent calls.

## Instructions

In the exercise, the following HIP functions are needed:

* `hipStreamCreate()`
* `hipMemcpyAsync()`
* `hipEventRecord()`
* `hipEventSynchronize()`
* `hipEventElapsedTime()`
* `hipStreamDestroy()`

### Case 0

1) Create and destroy `n_stream` streams in the main function in the locations marked by `#error`
2) The function `case_0()` is already complete and can be used as a reference

### Case 1

1) In the `case_1()` function, create a loop over `n_stream` and split the work done by the kernel call of Case 0 into multiple kernels calls (one kernel call per stream with an even workload per stream)
3) Record events using `start_event` and `stop_event` arrays for each stream before and after the kernel call

### Case 2

1) Create a loop into the function `case_2()`
	1) In the loop: Split the data copy from host to device into `n_stream` asynchronous memcopies. one for each stream (make sure the memcopies are split evenly for each stream)
	2) In the loop: Launch the kernel for each stream similarly to Case 1
	3) In the loop: Split the data copy from device to host into `n_stream` asynchronous memcopies. one for each stream (make sure the memcopies are split asynchronously 
2) Record total timing of the loop, use `start_event[n_stream]` and `stop_event[n_stream]` array positions
3) Additionally, record events for each stream using `start_event` and `stop_event` arrays before H-to-D memcopy and after D-to-H memcopy, respectively
4) Synchronize host with each `stop_event[i] `
5) Get timings between each corresponding `start_event[i]` and `stop_event[i]`

### Case 3

1) Copy the case 2 here
2) Instead of doing the asynchronous memcopies and the kernel in the same loop as in Case 2, create a separate loop for each (3 loops in total)
3) Make sure you record events in appropriate locations to get correct timings

## Additional considerations

* You can try setting `USE_PINNED_HOST_MEM` to `0` at line `#6`, to see how the timings change if we do not use pinned host memory.
