mpi/docs/06-non-blocking-communication.md, before:

---
title:  Non-blocking communication
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2024
lang:   en
---

# Non-blocking communication

- Non-blocking communication operations return immediately and perform sending/receiving in the background
    - Communication needs to be separately finalized
- Enables some computing concurrently with communication
- Avoids many common deadlock situations
- Collective operations are also available as non-blocking versions

# Non-blocking send

MPI_Isend(`buffer`{.input}, `count`{.input}, `datatype`{.input}, `dest`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `request`{.output})
: Starts a nonblocking send

<p>
* Parameters similar to `MPI_Send` but has an additional request parameter
* Send buffer must not be written to until one has checked that the operation is over

# Non-blocking receive

MPI_Irecv(`buffer`{.output}, `count`{.input}, `datatype`{.input}, `source`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `request`{.output})
: Starts a nonblocking receive

<p>
* Parameters similar to `MPI_Recv` but has an additional request parameter and no status parameter
* Receive buffer guaranteed to contain the data only after one has checked that the operation is over

# Non-blocking communication

- Important: Send/receive operations have to be finalized
    - `MPI_Wait`, `MPI_Waitall`, ...
        - Blocking calls to wait for the communication started with `MPI_Isend` or `MPI_Irecv` to finish
    - `MPI_Test`, ...
        - Non-blocking calls testing if the communication has finished
    - Note: successfully finished send does not mean successful receive!
- You can mix non-blocking and blocking routines
    - A message sent by `MPI_Isend` can be received with `MPI_Recv`

# Wait for a non-blocking operation

MPI_Wait(`request`{.input}, `status`{.output})
: Waits for a communication to complete

<p>
- Status of the completed communication is similar to that of `MPI_Recv`

<p>
- Demo: `send_and_recv_nonblocking.c`


# Wait for many non-blocking operations

MPI_Waitall(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Waits for all the given communications to complete

MPI_Waitany(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `index`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Waits for any one of the given communication to complete

MPI_Waitsome(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `outcount`{.output}, `array_of_indices`{.output}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Waits for some of the given communications to complete


# Typical usage pattern

<div class=column>
**`MPI_Irecv`(<font color="green">ghost_data</font>)**<br>
**`MPI_Isend`(<font color="purple">border_data</font>)**<br>
**`compute`(<font color="DeepSkyBlue">ghost_independent_data</font>)**<br>
**`MPI_Waitall()`**<br>
**`compute`(<font color="purple">border_data</font>)**
</div>
<div class=column>
![](img/usage_pattern.png){.center width=100%}
</div>

# Overlapping communication with computation

- Use of non-blocking operations does not guarantee overlapping communication with computation
- In terms of code logic, non-blocking operations return immediately, but performing communication requires CPU resources that need to be available for communication too
- Without dedicated resources for communication, the communication might progress only when needed for MPI calls, e.g., `MPI_Wait`

# Overlapping communication with computation

- There are two general mechanisms inside the MPI library to allow communication to proceed at the same time with computations
  - Progress thread within the library
  - Offloading part of the communication to network interface card (NIC)
- The MPI implementations have typically settings and environment variables to configure communication progression mechanism
  - See demonstrations codes: <https://github.com/cschpc/mpi-overlap>


# Checking for non-blocking messages {.section}

# Non-blocking test for non-blocking operations

MPI_Test(`request`{.input}, `flag`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of a specific communication

<p>
- A call to `MPI_Test` is non-blocking
  - Allows one to schedule alternative activities while periodically checking for completion
- Flag is true if the operation has completed
- Status of the completed communication is similar to that of `MPI_Recv`

# Test for many non-blocking operations

MPI_Testall(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `flag`{.output}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of all the given communications

MPI_Testany(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `index`{.output}, `flag`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of any one of the given communications

MPI_Testsome(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `outcount`{.output}, `array_of_indices`{.output}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of some of the given communications


# Message probing

MPI_Iprobe(`source`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `flag`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Non-blocking test for a message without receiving it

<p>
- Flag is true if there is a message that matches the pattern and can be received
- `MPI_ANY_SOURCE` can be used for source
- `MPI_ANY_TAG` can be used for tag


# Message probing

MPI_Probe(`source`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `status`{.output})
: Blocking test for a message without receiving it

<p>
- `MPI_Probe` is blocking version of `MPI_Iprobe`
- The call returns only after a matching message has been found



# Non-blocking collectives {.section}

# Non-blocking collectives

- Non-blocking collectives (“``I``-collectives”) enable the overlapping of communication and computation together with the benefits of collective communication.

- Same syntax as for blocking collectives, besides
    - “``I``” at the front of the name (`MPI_Alltoall` -> `MPI_Ialltoall`)
    - Request parameter at the end of the list of arguments
    - Completion needs to be waited

# Example: Non-blocking broadcasting

MPI_Ibcast(`buf`{.input}`fer`{.output}, `count`{.input}, `datatype`{.input}, `root`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `request`{.output})
: Broadcasts data from the root process to all other processes of the group

<p>
- Request parameter at the end of the list of arguments in comparison to `MPI_Bcast`


# Non-blocking collectives

- Restrictions
    - Have to be called in same order by all ranks in a communicator
    - Mixing of blocking and non-blocking collectives is not allowed


# Non-blocking collectives

![](img/non_blocking_large.png){.center width=100%}

![](img/blue_arrow.png){width=1%} (Computation) work 1
<br>
![](img/green_arrow.png){width=1%} (Computation) work 2, not
involving data in the `MPI_Allreduce` operation


# Summary

- Non-blocking communication is often useful way to do communication in MPI
- Non-blocking communication core features
    - Open receives with `MPI_Irecv`
    - Start sending with `MPI_Isend`
    - Possibly do something else while the communication takes place
    - Complete the communication with `MPI_Wait` or a variant
- Collective operations can also be done in non-blocking mode

Commit message:

Add demos on testing and probing messages

mpi/docs/06-non-blocking-communication.md, after:

---
title:  Non-blocking communication
event:  CSC Summer School in High-Performance Computing 2024
lang:   en
---

# Non-blocking communication

- Non-blocking communication operations return immediately and perform sending/receiving in the background
    - Communication needs to be separately finalized
- Enables some computing concurrently with communication
- Avoids many common deadlock situations
- Collective operations are also available as non-blocking versions

# Non-blocking send

MPI_Isend(`buffer`{.input}, `count`{.input}, `datatype`{.input}, `dest`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `request`{.output})
: Starts a nonblocking send

<p>
* Parameters similar to `MPI_Send` but has an additional request parameter
* Send buffer must not be written to until one has checked that the operation is over

# Non-blocking receive

MPI_Irecv(`buffer`{.output}, `count`{.input}, `datatype`{.input}, `source`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `request`{.output})
: Starts a nonblocking receive

<p>
* Parameters similar to `MPI_Recv` but has an additional request parameter and no status parameter
* Receive buffer guaranteed to contain the data only after one has checked that the operation is over

# Non-blocking communication

- Important: Send/receive operations have to be finalized
    - `MPI_Wait`, `MPI_Waitall`, ...
        - Blocking calls to wait for the communication started with `MPI_Isend` or `MPI_Irecv` to finish
    - `MPI_Test`, ...
        - Non-blocking calls testing if the communication has finished
    - Note: successfully finished send does not mean successful receive!
- You can mix non-blocking and blocking routines
    - A message sent by `MPI_Isend` can be received with `MPI_Recv`

# Wait for a non-blocking operation

MPI_Wait(`request`{.input}, `status`{.output})
: Waits for a communication to complete

<p>
- Status of the completed communication is similar to that of `MPI_Recv`

<p>
- Demo: `send_and_recv_nonblocking.c`


# Wait for many non-blocking operations

MPI_Waitall(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Waits for all the given communications to complete

MPI_Waitany(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `index`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Waits for any one of the given communication to complete

MPI_Waitsome(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `outcount`{.output}, `array_of_indices`{.output}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Waits for some of the given communications to complete


# Typical usage pattern

<div class=column>
**`MPI_Irecv`(<font color="green">ghost_data</font>)**<br>
**`MPI_Isend`(<font color="purple">border_data</font>)**<br>
**`compute`(<font color="DeepSkyBlue">ghost_independent_data</font>)**<br>
**`MPI_Waitall()`**<br>
**`compute`(<font color="purple">border_data</font>)**
</div>
<div class=column>
![](img/usage_pattern.png){.center width=100%}
</div>

# Overlapping communication with computation

- Use of non-blocking operations does not guarantee overlapping communication with computation
- In terms of code logic, non-blocking operations return immediately, but performing communication requires CPU resources that need to be available for communication too
- Without dedicated resources for communication, the communication might progress only when needed for MPI calls, e.g., `MPI_Wait`

# Overlapping communication with computation

- There are two general mechanisms inside the MPI library to allow communication to proceed at the same time with computations
  - Progress thread within the library
  - Offloading part of the communication to network interface card (NIC)
- The MPI implementations have typically settings and environment variables to configure communication progression mechanism
  - See demonstrations codes: <https://github.com/cschpc/mpi-overlap>


# Checking for non-blocking messages {.section}

# Non-blocking test for non-blocking operations

MPI_Test(`request`{.input}, `flag`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of a specific communication

<p>
- A call to `MPI_Test` is non-blocking
  - Allows one to schedule alternative activities while periodically checking for completion
- Flag is true if the operation has completed
- Status of the completed communication is similar to that of `MPI_Recv`

<p>
- Demo: `send_and_recv_nonblocking_testing.c`

# Test for many non-blocking operations

MPI_Testall(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `flag`{.output}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of all the given communications

MPI_Testany(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `index`{.output}, `flag`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of any one of the given communications

MPI_Testsome(`count`{.input}, `array_of_requests`{.input}, `outcount`{.output}, `array_of_indices`{.output}, `array_of_statuses`{.output})
: Tests for the completion of some of the given communications


# Message probing

MPI_Iprobe(`source`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `flag`{.output}, `status`{.output})
: Non-blocking test for a message without receiving it

<p>
- Flag is true if there is a message that matches the pattern and can be received
- `MPI_ANY_SOURCE` can be used for source
- `MPI_ANY_TAG` can be used for tag

<p>
- Demo: `send_and_recv_nonblocking_probing.c`


# Message probing

MPI_Probe(`source`{.input}, `tag`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `status`{.output})
: Blocking test for a message without receiving it

<p>
- `MPI_Probe` is blocking version of `MPI_Iprobe`
- The call returns only after a matching message has been found



# Non-blocking collectives {.section}

# Non-blocking collectives

- Non-blocking collectives (“``I``-collectives”) enable the overlapping of communication and computation together with the benefits of collective communication.

- Same syntax as for blocking collectives, besides
    - “``I``” at the front of the name (`MPI_Alltoall` -> `MPI_Ialltoall`)
    - Request parameter at the end of the list of arguments
    - Completion needs to be waited

# Example: Non-blocking broadcasting

MPI_Ibcast(`buf`{.input}`fer`{.output}, `count`{.input}, `datatype`{.input}, `root`{.input}, `comm`{.input}, `request`{.output})
: Broadcasts data from the root process to all other processes of the group

<p>
- Request parameter at the end of the list of arguments in comparison to `MPI_Bcast`


# Non-blocking collectives

- Restrictions
    - Have to be called in same order by all ranks in a communicator
    - Mixing of blocking and non-blocking collectives is not allowed


# Non-blocking collectives

![](img/non_blocking_large.png){.center width=100%}

![](img/blue_arrow.png){width=1%} (Computation) work 1
<br>
![](img/green_arrow.png){width=1%} (Computation) work 2, not
involving data in the `MPI_Allreduce` operation


# Summary

- Non-blocking communication is often useful way to do communication in MPI
- Non-blocking communication core features
    - Open receives with `MPI_Irecv`
    - Start sending with `MPI_Isend`
    - Possibly do something else while the communication takes place
    - Complete the communication with `MPI_Wait` or a variant
- Collective operations can also be done in non-blocking mode
